[SWOOSH]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> REGINA MEREDITH:
As a neuroscientist,
when someone says, oh, no,
we're only using 5 or 10%
of the brain.
What's actually going on?
>> TARA SWART: We don't talk
about hardwiring anymore.
We talk about
softwiring, which means
that even something that's
been there for a very long time
can be, not undone,
but overwritten.
I still see so many people,
including high-powered people,
that are not doing these
basic things, which is rest,
fuel, hydrate,
oxygenate, and simplify.
Your brain is a tiny
percentage of your whole body.
But it's a very
energy-hungry organ.
It's using up 20% of what you
eat today when you're asleep.
With your unlimited
brain potential,
you can take agency
and prime your brain
to go out into the real
world and notice and grasp
opportunities to bring
those things closer to you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> REGINA: My guest
today, Dr. Tara Swart,
is going to tell you about the
neurological science behind why
your favorite practices, such as
vision boards and visualization
in general, work.
This means, next time a
friend or family member
pokes fun at you for
your positive practices,
you can read them
in on the science.
Thank you so much
for joining us today.
It's just lovely to see you.
And I have your book.
It has at least 100
dog-eared pages,
which is like every other page.
You really are now
bridging the gap
between the world of
neuroscience and the practices
that we've all participated
in over the last 30, 40
years the evolution of
human consciousness.
And so I just want
to applaud you
for doing the hard work for us.
I think yours is really now
the primer on how to use
the brain to a better effect.
So first, welcome.
>> SWART: Thank you so much for
having me and for acknowledging
that because, at one
point in my career,
it did feel like
a bit of a risk.
As a professor at
MIT, I wanted to start
sharing my personal
beliefs about spirituality.
And, after a crisis
in my own life,
I'd managed to merge
those really successfully,
the science and
the spirituality.
And, actually,
writing "The Source"
and having it come
out into the world
was probably that
last step that really
made me feel like, yes,
these two things can coexist.
And not only can they,
but it's so, so important
for people to understand
and leverage that.
>> REGINA: It's not
just, can they coexist?
They do coexist.
>> SWART: I know.
>> REGINA: We just had
everything so partitioned
in our understanding
of how mind works.
And you've allowed all
of it to come together,
but to explain it in a
scientific way why it works.
So let's start
with your childhood
because you were raised
in England, in London.
But you came from East
Indian parents and heritage.
And they still had some
of their practices,
which you weren't initially
proud of, especially
as a teenager.
So let's talk about that
and how that influenced you.
>> SWART: Yeah, so what I feel
is that, when people emigrate,
they actually hold on to their
traditions even more strongly
than people that remain
in the original country.
So things like my
cousins eat meat,
but I was brought up
completely vegetarian.
And, yeah, the classic things.
We had like the
chanting and the incense
sticks and the meditation and
the yoga and the breathwork.
I was brought up with that.
And it became popular in
Western culture decades later.
And I just wanted
to fit in at school.
I didn't-- nobody
else's parents.
>> REGINA: You didn't want to
smell like incense when you
came in the classroom.
>> SWART: Or curry.
>> REGINA: Or curry.
[LAUGHING]
>> SWART: So, yeah, I guess
there was a period of time that
I rejected those things.
And maybe I had to
come full circle.
But what I really did
was I separated them.
So I had one life
at home and one life
at school and with my friends.
And it took a certain
level of maturity.
But then it also actually
took a personal crisis for me
to really think about, well,
I need elements of both.
And that kind of
started the journey
of the career change and then--
>> REGINA: The
integration of these--
>> SWART: The integration.
>> REGINA: So you became a
teenage little fashionista
and things like this,
what girls do in London,
great place to be a fashionista.
But you decided to get a
degree in neuroscience.
And, also, as I
recall, psychology, you
were working with
psychology and neuroscience.
How did that go
in your education?
>> SWART: The way that it works
in the UK is a bit different.
And, actually, when
I went to university,
you couldn't-- neuroscience
itself wasn't a degree.
So we can go straight from
high school to medical school.
So I went to medical school.
>> REGINA: Oh, without the
interim four years we have
in America.
Interesting.
>> SWART: So we have the
theoretical three years.
And it's called preclinical.
And then you-- well,
it's actually two.
But you can do special
topics in the third year.
And I chose the neuro
of every topic--
neuroanatomy, neuropharmacology,
neurophysiology.
>> REGINA: Interesting, OK.
>> SWART: I was just so
fascinated by the brain
and the mind, which was still
seen as quite separate at that
point.
So I did my PhD in neuroscience.
I took three years
out to do that.
Then I came back
to medical school
and did clinical practice.
I thought I wanted to
become a neurologist,
but I decided to become
a psychiatrist, which
is an MD, as opposed
to a psychologist.
And I worked as a
psychiatrist for seven years.
And then I decided to change
career at around the same time
that I was getting divorced.
>> REGINA: So how old would
you have been at that time
because the difference in the
way the years are calculated
in your educational system.
>> SWART: So I went to
university at the age of 18.
And I was at university
for nine years.
And I came out with
an MD and a PhD.
>> REGINA: So you're 27 years
old when you entered the work
world as a psychiatrist.
>> SWART: Yes.
>> REGINA: And then you were
working with the national
health care system.
So there are certain guidelines.
And so you were allowed
to throw lots of pills
at people if need be.
>> SWART: Oh, yes.
>> REGINA: So you could toss
them their prescriptions
and their pills.
But they weren't getting
better in the way
that you would like to
have seen for your clients.
So let's talk about
your experience
as a young and, at this time,
compassionate and idealistic
young psychiatrist.
>> SWART: Thank you for
asking that question.
So all I did was
diagnose and prescribe.
And, even though I was into
healthy eating and exercise,
it could be mentioned,
but it certainly
wasn't part of the holistic way
that our patients were treated.
And I cared a great
deal about my patients.
But I couldn't stay
in that system.
I didn't feel like I would
be giving the best of myself
to the world if I
stayed in that system.
And so I got to the
point where-- in the NHS,
you're really dealing
with the lowest
socioeconomic group of people.
Usually, their families
have deserted them.
They don't have partners.
Their children are
taken away from them.
They can't hold down a job.
And I thought, OK,
what could I really do
to make life better for these
people in a very different way?
And the first part
of that step was
to go and work with businesses,
with really influential people
that have corporate social
responsibility and teams
and families and kind of work
through that cascade effect.
And then, as you know,
the latest iteration
has been much more about
being on social media,
having my podcast,
writing my book,
and trying to spread that
information as excessively--
>> REGINA: Far and wide.
>> SWART: --as possible.
>> REGINA: So you went along.
And there came a
point in your life.
You were feeling
this dissatisfaction.
Let me just ask you.
When you're sitting with
someone whose life is so broken,
whose health is in such poor
shape mentally and physically,
did you feel like
if you could just
take time out and
away from everything
and be with this
person, you could really
do something for them?
>> SWART: You're giving me
goosebumps because it's been
so long since I was
in that position.
But I remember always saying
if I could bottle a loving
partner, I'd be out of a job.
So the few patients
that did have
somebody that really stuck by
them through the tough times
and in the good times and
helped them to make sure
that they stayed
on their medication
or practiced the
healthy life habits,
there was a huge difference
between those people
and the people that had
nobody that cared about them
and, therefore, no real purpose
other than just surviving.
And, yeah, absolutely, there's
just always some patients
that you fall in love with.
And you have a special
relationship with their family.
And you think if I
could take you home,
you'd never have to go
to the hospital again.
There is that element of that.
But you can't do
that for everyone.
>> REGINA: No, you can't.
And I ask because this is
a growing phenomena right
now certainly in America.
I don't know how it's
handled in England.
But I live in California.
And we're known-- we make
headlines in the news
for our homeless situation,
which is usually--
has a great deal to do with
mental illness and people who
aren't able to hang on anymore.
And no one knows-- they don't
know-- there's no system really
in place for that.
And you're right--
there isn't a partner.
These people don't
have a loving partner.
>> SWART: It's totally heart--
it's totally heartbreaking.
>> REGINA: The partner,
if they have a partner,
it's usually their dog,
which is better than--
>> SWART: Nothing.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
OK, so, in your own life,
you had some breakdowns
of your own.
So you're going along, and
you're a little hotshot
doing your thing.
You're a little brokenhearted.
You can't do more.
And you're married.
OK, now what happens?
>> SWART: So I was married
to somebody who was also
a psychiatrist.
So we worked together.
And we'd met quite young, and we
were from different countries.
He's South African.
We're actually very,
very good friends now.
But I think, in those
formative years, from 25 to 35,
we just grew into
very different people.
And I had already started
thinking about changing career.
And it was so
interesting looking back
that people thought
it was really strange
that I would give up
being a medical doctor
to become a coach.
And so I was challenged on
that on an almost daily basis.
And I realized that
I had to come up
with a really good
answer to that.
Otherwise, it was going to start
affecting my own idea of what
I should be doing and who I am.
And, like we said, in the
UK, you go to medical school
when you're 18.
Your entire adult life is
associated with that identity,
that you're a doctor.
And I didn't know anything else.
And I didn't think I
could do anything else.
So I had to start
saying to people,
no, the reason I
think it's better
that I'm going to do what
I'm going to go and do
is a little bit
like I said to you--
I can have a bigger impact.
And I think that kind of
widened the gap between us
because it felt like
what I was saying was,
your job isn't good
enough for me anymore.
And I can go and do
something better.
So he was still very
supportive in terms
of we'd agreed that if
I gave up my job that I
would need a bit of help
to get started again.
But I found myself
in my mid-30s,
having been married,
suddenly single,
having been a
doctor-- and that was
a very strong part
of my identity--
not really knowing
what I was anymore.
We'd also lived abroad
a couple of times.
So we'd worked in
Australia and in Bermuda.
So I came back home to London
to start my new career.
But I had to find a
place to live on my own
again and reintegrate
with my school friends.
So it was a real
period of transition.
And, at that time, I was
drawn to Jungian psychology
and Buddhist philosophy.
Those were just the
two things that I
became super interested in and
went down a rabbit hole with.
And they seemed to make
sense together to me
and those were the
essences and concepts
that helped me to come out
of that very dark place
that I was in for a while.
And I think that must have
stuck with me when I came back
to write "The
Source" because it's
kind of psychological but
also Eastern spirituality.
So that's definitely been
a theme because I think--
I was 35 then.
So it was seven, eight years
later that I wrote the book.
>> REGINA: Right, so tell us.
What is-- before we go into
the rest of the story--
what is "the source?"
>> SWART: So the source,
obviously, has very,
very strong spiritual
connotations in terms of being
whatever--
however you call it, God,
the universe, spirit.
>> REGINA: This is a very
open-minded audience.
Any term you wish.
>> SWART: And so any term
that each of us wishes.
But it's basically
the place that all
of that spiritual energy comes
from that we can tap into,
that means that
we're all connected.
But I took that word, with
all of those connotations,
and said, basically,
for you, it's
your brainpower
and the potential
that you hold that
you haven't used yet.
So it's both of those things,
the spiritual and the fact
that, in your own
brain, unless you're
a neuroscientist and
an MD, you probably
don't know how
incredible your brain is.
>> REGINA: Absolutely,
so we always hear, well,
we're only using, oh,
about 10% of the brain.
Now that's-- we're
talking brain versus mind,
a whole different subject.
So, as a neuroscientist,
when someone says,
oh no, we're only using,
oh, 5 or 10% of the brain.
What's actually going on?
>> SWART: OK, so it doesn't
quite work like that.
So you've got your brain.
The emotional part is about
the size of your clenched fist.
And then the more
logical systems
are around that in about
the same kind of width.
But it's all systems
and subsystems
that have cascade
effects with each other.
It's not like this
part of your brain
is for reading and writing
and that part of your brain
is for vision.
So it may be that, when you're
sitting here interviewing,
as a very experienced
person, you're
accessing a 10% of your brain
that's just honed into this
being an expert at this task.
But you can access
all of your brain,
but you don't need
to all the time.
So it's really about
maybe accessing parts
that you don't use all
the time to just increase
your field of what you
can do, maybe using
different parts of the
brain at the same time
together more often
than we have to.
And just really accessing
all of the potential
that you have because the
brain is very energy efficient.
>> REGINA: That's what
I was just going to ask.
>> SWART: So it won't do that
unless you override it and say,
but I want to bring
in my creativity.
I want to bring in my curiosity.
>> REGINA: It's always
going to conserve energy.
>> SWART: Exactly.
So the things you're
really good at,
those are the easiest
things for your brain to do.
>> REGINA: So now let's
talk about another myth.
And that is, well, it's a shame
what's happening because--
especially when you
see little children
that aren't having the best
programming in their youth--
say it's a shame.
It's all done by seven.
We are who we are.
That's when all the
development happens.
Myth, so let's go ahead
and bust that myth.
>> SWART: I love
busting neuromyths.
So this is good.
So there's a couple of things.
We used to think
that, by the time
you physically stop
growing, so roughly 18,
that that's kind of
when your brain is set.
But a subset of that is that
the things that you experience
by the age of seven
have the biggest
impact on your personality
and how you're triggered
and how you respond
to things for the rest
of your emotional life.
So it's not untrue that
the longer a pathway
has been in your brain--
so neurons that fire
together wire together.
The more you
experience something,
that becomes more entrenched--
an entrenched pathway
in your brain.
It's not untrue that the
longer it's been there,
the more subconsciously
that will play out.
But we don't talk about
hardwiring anymore.
We talk about
softwiring, which means
that even something that's
been there for a very long time
can be, not undone,
but overwritten.
So I'm being very, very
precise with my words
here because I could just
say, no, that's not true--
>> REGINA: I like
the word overwritten,
to overwrite a program.
>> SWART: Because you can't
actually undo a pathway
in your brain.
But if you replace it with
a new desired thought that--
>> REGINA: That's stronger.
Do they compete?
How does that work then?
>> SWART: They compete.
So the one that's been
there for longer--
this is why that
myth comes about.
The one that's
been there already
is the energy-efficient pathway.
So there's two things
that can overwrite that--
repetition and
emotional intensity.
So repetition we can
control quite easily.
So let's say you have a
belief that you were just
like your grandmother, these
sorts of things that get
said to people before
the age of seven.
If you repeatedly, every time
that comes up, say to yourself,
actually, I'm my own person.
I may have elements
that resemble
other people in my family.
But I can be my own person.
If you say that every day, 10
times a day, at some point,
that's going to override
this belief that you held.
The emotional intensity
one is harder to create.
>> REGINA: It's almost like
it comes in the form of trauma
oftentimes.
>> SWART: Trauma or--
>> REGINA: Surprise.
>> SWART: So surprise.
I mean, traumatic--
if you and I went
through a traumatic
incident together--
let's say something suddenly
happened in this building--
we would bond
emotionally much more
than if we just did this
interview and nothing went
wrong.
So it is-- but what
you can do is--
I know we're going to come on
to talk about visualization
and manifestation is you can
create an image that's very
emotionally important to you
about why you cannot continue
the rest of your life
believing that you're just
a reincarnation of
your grandmother,
and you've got no chance
to be your own person or be
different.
So you could do that
with visualization.
You could do it with journaling.
>> REGINA: So how can you add
emotion in without surprise
and without trauma?
How do you wire the thought
you are not your grandma.
You are your own being.
You repeat this every day
to overwrite that program.
Are there other tools,
frequencies, music,
whatever that you can over--
dance that you can overwrite it
with while you're saying this?
>> SWART: Yeah, so using
any of your senses.
We all know about
the five senses.
But there are other senses too
like our temperature sensors,
thermoception, our pain
sensors, nociception.
And then my favorite
one is interoception,
which is your sense of the
state of the physiology
of the inside of your body.
So, for example,
if you think about,
how do I feel when people
compare me to my grandmother?
You might get butterflies
in your stomach
or you might get a closed
feeling in your throat
or crawling on your skin.
Acknowledging that
too and managing
to soothe yourself to reverse
those physical symptoms.
But the biggest one I would say
is that trauma and to some--
surprise is kind of in
between on this spectrum
of basic human emotions.
You've seen it in the book.
So, mostly, trauma pushes
us into the stress side
of those emotions.
So it makes us feel things like
fear, anger, shame, sadness,
disgust.
And, when we feel
those emotions,
we have higher levels of
the stress hormone cortisol.
And that affects the blood
flow around the brain.
And it affects which
brain pathways really
come to the fore, so the ones
that were put there by trauma.
If you find ways
to move yourself
away from those
emotions to love,
to trust, to gratitude,
to joy, then you
allow oxytocin to flourish.
And that's the bonding hormone.
It makes you feel like
you can lower your guard.
You can take healthy risks.
And that's a lifelong practice.
That can come through gratitude.
It can come through journaling.
But it has to also
come through--
when you feel triggered by
your trauma, that you can say,
I'm safe.
I'm OK.
That you can control
your breathing,
that you can try and move away
from those emotions to the ones
that you want to overwrite with.
>> REGINA: Right, well,
and I was just thinking
if you're talking about
engaging the senses,
you could even
have, for example,
an essential oil that
represents the new pathway.
And do that to just lift and
remind yourself and reinforce
that.
There's so many
ways we can do that.
>> SWART: And there's music.
>> REGINA: And there's
music, absolutely.
And so I would think,
when you do like-- say
a light fell on us right now.
And we were frightened
and maybe even injured,
and we bonded on that level.
In real life, people bond
around bad news and trauma
all the time and end up in
super codependent relationships.
So is it a little more difficult
when you-- on a familial level,
on a family level, have bonded
through trauma to break it.
>> SWART: Yeah, so especially
if it's two or more people
involved because then it's not
just about you trying to break
it.
>> REGINA: And that's
why if a family--
a couple loses a child, they
often end up splitting up.
They just can't handle
between them the trauma.
>> SWART: That's a
very specific one.
So that is-- and it's
similar in divorce.
But it's more magnified
with the loss of a child,
that the emotional journey
for each of the parents.
And let's just say for
argument's sake here
that we're talking about
a heterosexual couple.
Although, it doesn't have to be.
The gender difference in
that emotional journey
is so inexplicable
to the other person
that you're dealing
with your own grief,
but you also can't really be
there for the other person.
And, unfortunately, that's why
people tend to split up a lot.
It's just too hard.
But let's say it's not
something that traumatic.
And it's in a family
or a pair of people.
So I've been doing this--
you've been doing
this for decades.
I've probably been doing
it for a decade and a half.
So there's a lot of
pretraining that means
that, when you are confronted
with a difficult situation,
you've already got
a way of being.
So, when we were sitting here,
I'd already met you backstage.
So I wasn't nervous anymore.
But I was a bit
before I met you.
But, when you were just
finalizing your notes,
I was just looking at you and
thinking, you're so beautiful,
the lipstick, the
nails, the blazer.
And they're all matching.
And I was just sending
you love and gratitude.
And so I didn't make
it about, am I nervous?
What's going to happen?
How am I feeling?
I just sent this little
love bubble around us.
>> REGINA: And that
is the key, I think,
is we don't always have to be
at the center of our existence.
To be able to look
out at the world
and appreciate, like you said,
just appreciation for what
you're surrounded by, what
life itself's surrounding you.
I find that-- well, I find
that, for myself, personally,
one of the strategies I have
if I'm feeling blue is I
just have to say, who
would like me to bake
them a cake today or something?
I like to bake.
And then I just immediately
go into the mode
of doing something that
I know someone else will
love and appreciate.
And I'm automatically
brought up with it.
>> SWART: I love that.
But, remember, what
we're both doing,
actually, indirectly, is
inducing oxytocin in our brain.
>> REGINA: Yes, yes.
>> SWART: So that's one--
it's one of those things where
it's OK to be a bit selfish
because, by doing something
nice for somebody else or
even thinking something nice
for someone else, you're
actually pushing your brain
into the trust
and love emotions.
>> REGINA: So to be part
of something, to give,
to appreciate automatically
starts the flow
of the oxytocin.
And that's-- our society seems
to be a little low on our tank
of oxytocin right now at large.
>> SWART: Yeah, when we see the
fabric of society break down,
whether it's crime or just
people not pulling together
over a crisis, we know
that oxytocin, in society,
societal levels of
oxytocin are low.
For ourselves, loneliness
has been a big issue
recently because we get oxytocin
from physical affection.
>> REGINA: During
lockdown, it was almost--
>> SWART: It was terrible.
>> REGINA: It was
psychologically criminal that
people ended up
feeling as they did.
>> SWART: I know.
So what I spoke a lot
about, from my psychological
background, during
that time, was bathing
because immersing
yourself in warm water
is like getting a hug.
Self-massage, so even just like
applying lotion to your body.
And if you did-- if you
were not completely alone--
and a lot of people got
dogs for that reason
as well because you
can get the oxytocin.
But if you're not
completely alone,
making that extra
effort to be physically
affectionate with
your family members.
>> REGINA: Yeah, OK, good.
So we've hit what happens when
you reinforce negative thinking
and patterns.
We've already gotten
a little bit of what
you can do to overwrite them.
But there's a lot more.
We're only going to just scratch
the surface of your book.
I highly encourage
people to get the book
and to give it to
anyone who is looking
to change their
patterned thinking
and to expand and
transform their life.
You've really done
phenomenal work.
So I'm-- big
endorsement from me.
>> SWART: Thank you.
>> REGINA: Well, that's why
all the dog-eared pages.
So let's get to the brain
optimization part of this.
And what we start
doing, what we need
to do on a really
basic level now
to give our brain the nutrients
it needs so we can start
this next part of the journey.
>> SWART: Yeah, so it will
sound very, very basic.
But, like I said, in the
last decade and a half,
I still see so many people,
including high-powered people,
that are not doing
these basic things,
that I have to keep
repeating them.
So I like to put them into
five categories, which is rest,
fuel, hydrate,
oxygenate, and simplify.
So rest is mostly
sleep overnight
because there's some Nobel
Science prize winning
research from 2012
that shows that there's
an active cleansing process
of the brain overnight
that takes 7 to 8 hours.
So we actually need to be
in bed for 7 to 9 hours
to allow that process to
fully flush out the toxins
that it does.
So we used to think
it was like the fluid
around the brain trickled
through the ventricles
in the brain and very passively
just cleaned out the wear
and tear of daily stressors.
But, actually, it's a forcible
flushing out of toxins which
are the exact same pathologies
we see in neurodegenerative
diseases like Alzheimer's
and Parkinson's.
>> REGINA: Interesting
>> SWART: So tau proteins,
beta-amyloid plaques,
neurofibrillary tangles.
If that process isn't allowed
to do the cleaning overnight
on a regular basis, we start to
see those sorts of pathologies
growing in the brain.
And the best position for
that cleaning is on your side.
It doesn't matter if
it's your left or right,
but that's better than sleeping
on your front or your back.
>> REGINA: Yes, I
wrote a note here.
The glymphatic system.
I'd never heard this
or read this before.
This is new.
I'm a side sleeper, fortunately.
But I have a little side
pillow with an ear hole in it.
But tell-- my Womfy.
But, anyway, tell
us why that is.
What's happening?
>> SWART: So you've heard of the
lymphatic system in the body,
right?
It's exactly the
same kind of system.
But because we have glial
cells in our brain--
they named it the
glymphatic system.
And so the reason that
side sleeping is important
is because of the
way that your veins
are positioned when your neck is
slightly stretched to one side.
It helps to dump the toxins
into the blood and lymph systems
so that your body
can excrete it.
>> REGINA: Interesting.
Oh, I love it.
What about foods?
Because you say eat dark foods.
I've never seen anyone
say eat dark foods.
Fluffy, green, all
this, but not dark.
>> SWART: So I
would say with food,
so think of it as a computer
game, and there are levels.
So the lowest level is just
that you're eating regularly.
You're fueling your brain.
Your brain is a tiny
percentage of your whole body.
But it's a very
energy-hungry organ.
It's using up 20% of what you
eat today when you're asleep.
Now, when you are
focused on a task,
it's using up 25% of
your dietary intake.
And if we're stressed, it can
use up to 30% of what we eat.
And so I'll come to
the dark foods piece.
But what I mainly
say is that we all
think about what I should
eat because of my weight.
What I should eat if I
want to put on muscle.
What I should eat to be healthy.
But what about,
what should you eat
so that you can perform
optimally at your job,
that you can be there
for your family,
that you can manage
your emotions?
And so if you have got a
healthy, balanced, regular
diet, mostly plant-based--
we're supposed
to eat 30 different
plants a week.
It counts-- you count, coffee,
tea, rice and other grains,
nuts and seeds and spices.
It's not as hard as it sounds.
>> REGINA: I'm trying to think
of 30 different vegetables
a week.
No, that's not--
>> SWART: No, that's
what I thought at first.
But I did a food
diary for a week.
It's not as bad as you think.
After that, we can
start looking at things
like time-restricted eating.
So having the 16-hour
fast overnight or even
just a 12-hour fast
overnight and eating
within a time window.
And then, on top of that, we can
also do intermittent fasting,
which is actually restricting
calories two nonconsecutive
days of the week, but
only if you've already
got a good foundation.
And then, in terms
of neuroplasticity,
which we'll come
to, one of the ways
that that works in the
brain is neurogenesis,
which is growing
embryonic or baby nerve
cells into fully formed cells.
And one of the biggest
contributors to that
is the polyphenols, special
types of antioxidants
in dark-skinned foods.
So that means choose blueberries
instead of strawberries.
Choose purple-sprouting broccoli
instead of green broccoli.
Coffee and dark
chocolate also counts.
So that's good.
>> REGINA: That works.
And I'm all right on
some of those groups.
>> SWART: Yeah, and
then black beans.
>> REGINA: What about kale?
You'd want the darker,
leafy greens in that case?
>> SWART: Maybe the
cavolo nero, the black--
>> REGINA: And then
what about beets?
Red.
>> SWART: Beets are very good.
Obviously, eat greens.
We're not saying
don't eat greens.
But if you're really taking
it to the next level,
the darker skin--
>> REGINA: Interesting.
OK, and then I'm just
looking at the time.
We have a thousand
things to talk about.
People have to read the book.
OK, we're going to
hit the main parts.
So let's finish up
on this brain health,
and then we'll go to
the neuroplasticity
and to the visioning.
We're going to have to
skip over all the rest.
So talk about the other
factors in making sure.
And we'll keep it brief.
>> SWART: I'll just
keep it super brief.
But hydration is more
important than we realize.
When we're 1 to 3%
dehydrated, then
our ability to focus and
concentrate and recall facts
is affected.
And, by the time you're
thirsty, you're way more than 3%
dehydrated.
So we should drink
half a liter of water
for every 30 pounds of our
body weight per day roughly.
And then oxygenation
is about exercise
if you've already
got a good basis.
But if even that
seems too difficult,
it's actually about breathing.
When we're stressed, we breathe
shallow, or we hold our breath.
And the resources
for the brain are
glucose from a healthy,
balanced diet and oxygen.
So even just 10 deep breaths
at your desk, but, ideally, not
being sedentary.
>> REGINA: And then
peaceful practices.
>> SWART: So simplicity is about
mindfulness and bringing some
quiet time into your life.
But I feel like
people do 10 minutes
of meditation and the rest--
23 hours 50 minutes of their
life is busy and stressful.
So I really feel that
integrating those things,
eating mindfully, walking
mindfully, paying attention
to your loved ones.
Bringing that into life
like more of a patchwork,
that's the ideal in
terms of brain health.
>> REGINA: OK, so it's not
enough just to sleep at night
and have all these toxic
dumps happening and refreshing
the brain.
You have to actually do that
while you're alert and awake.
>> SWART: And the reason is--
>> REGINA: Find a way.
>> SWART: Because we
kind of think, why?
Why do we have to do that?
But, when we lived in the cave,
we walked barefoot in nature.
We looked at the stars
in the sky at night.
We sat around the
campfire with our family.
Now, we're always multitasking.
We're always on our devices.
We think that going for a
walk or listening to a podcast
is a break.
But, actually, you're
still doing something.
We need some time to
just be, especially
in the modern stressful
world and especially
after the last few years with
the pandemic and everything.
>> REGINA: It's been
so difficult. Globally,
it's been so difficult. OK,
when we're talking about
the pathways to thinking and
noradrenaline and all of that,
people need to read the book
and find the rest of that
information.
>> SWART: We kind
of covered that.
So I talked about the
stressful emotion is cortisol,
the trusting emotion's oxytocin.
And surprise, which is in
between, is noradrenaline,
and it augments either
of the other hormones.
>> REGINA: There is an--
and the whole portion
you wrote on emotions
and the emotional part of the
brain, of the mind complex,
that part is super important.
And, again, I encourage
people to read the book
to see how it overlays because
I do want to get to the vision
boarding part because
you and I, I've been
vision boarding for decades.
And I thought, wow,
this is so fun.
It's so easy.
But I did it a
very specific way.
And I noticed a lot
of the people that
did the boards with me,
their boards didn't turn out.
You do it a way--
well, you started doing
it a way that was really
quite opposite how I do it.
But it works.
So let's talk about those
vision boarding techniques.
I'll tell you mine really
quickly because we're
going to get into yours.
So, for me, it was
about you gather
your images, your magazines,
and your little glue
sticks and your poster board.
And I would tell people--
on New Year's Eve, we
do our vision boards--
have a little glass of champagne
if you can do that, and relax.
And, when you go through,
you only tear out images
with-- you don't
halt. You don't think.
You don't analyze.
You spontaneously
tear out those things
that make you have
butterflies and joy.
Nothing else gets torn out.
And, in doing that,
I was allowing
my higher self to speak
through my heart and body.
And so, for me,
everything came out.
It always did because it was
that spontaneous connection
between higher self
and my conscious world.
Now, other people didn't
have the same results.
But they were looking
at it, cutting out
lots of words, for example,
and motivational stuff,
but it wasn't working.
So now let's talk
about how we take all
of your scientific information.
You take it into an action
board and your process.
>> SWART: OK, so,
funnily enough,
your process and my process
is actually quite similar.
But I think we've come
to it from different ways
of thinking.
So I call it an action board
rather than a vision board
primarily because
there is this old idea
that you can create fantasy
images and then sit at home
and do nothing, and
somehow they'll come true.
>> REGINA: Old way.
>> SWART: Yeah, new way is
that, with your unlimited brain
potential, you can take agency
and prime your brain to go out
into the real world and
notice and grasp opportunities
to bring those
things closer to you.
But the really
critical factor is
what you've mentioned, which
is they must be things that you
truly, truly desire with your
head, your heart, and your gut,
not the things that
people expect you to do,
society says you should.
And I think that's where
a lot of people go wrong.
You know, when you
said they choose
the motivational statements,
that's what we're fed
that that's what we should--
>> REGINA: Personally, I don't
like motivational statements.
I don't like it when they
pop up in my social media.
I'm not motivated
by those words.
I'll be motivated by
an image or a sound.
>> SWART: And, also, I'm
guessing that, like me,
there's a lot of work going
on in the background all year
about what you really do want.
So, when it comes
to New Year's Eve,
that's how you know with
your gut and your heart.
And the people who are
looking and thinking,
that's because they
haven't done that prework.
And so it's staying up here
in their logical brain.
And if it doesn't sink
down into the subconscious,
then it's not going to
happen when you're out
in the real world
because if you're only
using your logical brain,
then you're thinking
about what you need to do next.
You're not thinking about,
what's going to make me thrive?
What's going to make
me live my best life?
What's going to bring in the
things that I really want?
That needs to be going on
under the radar all the time so
that, when there's
something that's
triggered by the visual
imagery that you've created,
you think, oh, well, actually,
that's an opportunity
to bring me closer to X.
There's also something
called the Tetris effect,
which people of a certain age
who played the Game Boy in bed
when they were little, when
you had to go to sleep,
you could still see
the bricks falling down
in your mind's eye.
And so keeping your
vision board by your bed
so that it's the last thing and
the first thing that you see--
last thing at night--
>> REGINA: Kind of
hypnagogic state too.
>> SWART: Yeah, hypnagogic
and hypnopompic.
So, when you go from
waking to sleeping
and sleeping to waking,
that's when your subconscious
is really impressionable.
>> REGINA: So when you open your
eyes and you see those images,
you're soaking it in
on all levels of mind.
>> SWART: Yeah, every day
at least twice a day, which,
again, means that,
when you're out there--
because of the way that your
brain filters out data that it
doesn't think is important and
the way that it tags certain
things in order of importance,
through both your logical
and your emotional system,
you're setting that system up
to put little flags on
things that are related
to your pictures on
your vision board.
>> REGINA: What I noticed too--
and, years ago, I dove into
the study of color therapy.
And it was a past life thing.
And, when I came in touch with
the concept in this lifetime,
I just had to go in head first.
So what I noticed is
in the vision boards--
and, thinking back on it,
you may have noticed too--
that, certain years, there
are dominant color themes
that come up where
every image I chose
had, say, a blue or
lavender background.
And, another year, they were
red or yellow and orange.
Each one of those are
very specific for what
our being, our higher mind
is calling forth from us
to set a tone.
And we were talking
about this off-camera.
And, as you say, well, that's
also chakric engagement.
>> SWART: I think it is.
>> REGINA: Is it chakra?
>> SWART: Well,
I'm saying it in--
>> REGINA: I always
say "shakra."
>> SWART: I'm saying
in my English accent,
so I'm saying chakra.
But you're saying shakra,
which sounds to me
so much more beautiful.
>> REGINA: But is it ch or sha?
>> SWART: In the Indian
languages, it would be cha.
>> REGINA: OK, so we're also--
that's bringing in chakric
information and desire.
>> SWART: And it's so
what I call nonconscious.
So you obviously know that
there's an imbalance somewhere.
And so you're attracted
to that color.
>> REGINA: Exactly.
In that year by reinforcing
that and seeing that,
you're going to balance that
aspect, that chakra out.
>> SWART: And I just want
to make sure that I say,
to back you up, that I really
encourage people not to use any
words on their vision board
because that's immediately
engaging your logical brain.
So, ideally, they
should be literal but--
or metaphorical representations
of things that you want.
So I could look at
your board and not
actually know what it means.
Like, I had a unicorn
on my board last year.
And there was an
interpretation of what
that meant for me that
could be completely
different for somebody else.
>> REGINA: Yes, and I remember
reading in your book something
about a horse that was glossy
rising up out of the water.
And you didn't know what
it meant at the time.
And I would choose that way too.
But it meant something
that turned out
to be almost specific.
Talk about it.
I love that.
>> SWART: That was this--
I mean, it was just so
beautiful that I just chose
only that image as my board.
And it was actually
the year that I
incorporated my business.
I went from being just
a freelance person
to having a proper company.
And so the word stable is
associated with a horse.
So, in my mind, it was stable.
It was loyalty.
I had a team.
But the horse was
kicking up water.
>> REGINA: Kicking up water.
>> SWART: And you
say you're a rebel.
Well, I wanted to cause some
disruption in my industry.
Coaching was just what it was.
And I didn't want
to fit into that.
I wanted to be different and
make it something different.
And there are a lot of
psychologists and business
people that become coaches.
But I was the only
former psychiatrist.
So I was kind of odd.
And that worried
me for a few years.
And, in the end, I thought,
well, that makes me different.
And I used to use heart
rate variability technology
way before everyone
else started using it.
So there was that.
But that picture was
actually an advert
for a certain brand, a very
desirable brand for women,
which, at the time,
I never ever thought
I would be able to afford.
So it was irrelevant to
me that it was that brand.
>> REGINA: It was the image.
>> SWART: But years later,
I got a handbag from--
a purse from that brand.
And I thought back, and I was
like, wow, years ago-- yeah.
>> REGINA: I did it.
So we only have a
minute or so left.
And we left out-- we
started, and we ended.
But we left out everything
in between in the book
because there's so
much good information.
But this was designed also as
not just a guide and not just
to educate but as a workbook.
It guides people in how we go
about the reformation of how
our brain is functioning,
transformation.
Any final thoughts on that?
>> SWART: Yeah, absolutely,
I think that it's one thing
to read the book.
But if you really want to
change your life, if you really
want to transform your
brain, if you really
want to reinvent
yourself, then there's
four chapters at the
end that take you
through all the
exercises, including
making the action board.
And I strongly believe
from the science backing
that if somebody worked
through all of those exercises,
their life could become--
>> REGINA: Have a new life.
>> SWART: A new life, basically.
You have a new life.
>> REGINA: Well, again,
I thanked you at the top,
and I thank you
again at the bottom.
And I thank you from
the bottom of my heart
that you've done
this for humanity
because you've done
a beautiful job.
I will now be recommending
this as the primary guidebook
for transformation
if you feel stuck.
>> SWART: Thank you so much.
>> REGINA: Thank
you so much, Tara.
>> SWART: Thank you.
>> REGINA: The title of
Tara's book is "The Source,"
which is a very friendly,
really easy read delving
into the science.
You can understand it.
I highly recommend it
for anyone attempting
to get more out of their lives.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]